Hikmat Abu Zayd

Wide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dr. Hikmat Abu Zayd

Hikmat Abu Zayd, 1962 Minister of Social Affairs of Egypt.
In office 29 September 1962 – 30 September 1965
under President Gamal Abdel Nasser 
and Prime Minister Ali Sabri


Personal details Born 1922 or 1923\[I\]
Shaykh Daud, Asyut Governorate, Egypt Died 30 July 2011 Cairo, Egypt
Nationality Egyptian Stateless (1970s–1991) Political party Arab
Socialist Union Spouse Muhammad Al Sayyad Alma mater Cairo University
(B.A., 1940) University of Edinburgh (diploma) University of St Andrews
(M.A., 1950) University of London (doctorate, 1957) Profession Professor
Military service Allegiance Egypt Battles/wars Suez War.

Hikmat Abu Zayd
(Arabic: حكمت أبو زيد; pronounced Hekmat Abu Zeid in Egyptian Arabic;
1922 or 1923 – 30 July 2011)\[N\] was an Egyptian politician and
academic. She became the first female cabinet minister in Egypt in 1962.
Her tenure as minister of social affairs set a precedent. Afterwards, it
became common for women to head that ministry. An avowed advocate of
Nasserism, Abu Zayd has had a major impact on Egyptian law and policy in
the areas of social affairs and insurance.

Early life and education Born in the village of Shaykh Daud, located
near the city of al-Qusiyya in Asyut Governorate, Abu Zayd grew up in a
nationalist household. Her father's job at the Egyptian State Railways
meant that he was assigned to many stations and was constantly on the
move. Although her mother was illiterate, Abu Zayd was encouraged to
read and was given access to her father's large library. Abu Zayd
received an advanced education. After completing her secondary education
at the Helwan Girls School, she obtained a licence in history from Cairo
University (then named Fuad I University) in 1940. She progressed
further in her academic studies by receiving a teaching certificate in
1941, a Master of Arts in education in 1950 from the University of St
Andrews, and finally a doctorate in educational psychology from the
University of London in 1957. She taught in the Women's College of Ain
Shams University from 1955 to 1964, before being promoted to the rank of
professor at Cairo University in 1965.

Tenure as minister In 1962, Abu Zayd sat on the preparatory committee
for the National Congress of Popular Forces. During her membership of
the committee, she expressed her disagreement with President Gamal Abdel
Nasser over some sections in the Charter of National Action. Impressed,
Nasser decided to appoint her as a minister. On 29 September 1962, Abu
Zayd was named minister of social affairs in Ali Sabri's first
government. She retained her role when the cabinet was reshuffled in
March 1964, and served until 1965.

Hekmat Abu Zaid meeting German counterpart Elisabeth Schwarzhaupt in
Bonn, September 1963 Abu Zayd was part of a new female leadership that
shared the same lower middle class background of Nasser and his fellow
Free Officers. Her appointment by Nasser was made in the context of his
new socialist program, which put emphasis on broadening access to
education and employment for all people, regardless of gender or social
class. The 1950s and especially the 1960s were a time of increased
female emancipation in Egypt. Polygyny was on the decline, and women
were increasingly holding key posts in government, industry and
academia. The country's first two female parliamentarians, Rawya Ateya
and Amina Shukri, were elected in 1957. Karimah al-Sa'id became the
deputy minister of education in the 1960s. Such high-level appointments
of a few well-qualified women were showcased by the government, while
the majority of Egyptian women remained stuck in the lower echelons of
society. Nasser's appointment of Abu Zayd was a politically significant
move. Including a woman in the cabinet was a way for him to co-opt
female-run charitable organizations into the Arab Socialist Union (ASU),
the country's newly formed sole political party. Many of these
associations were headed by women from prominent families and were
protective of their independence, which Nasser found objectionable. His
regime targeted women's organizations in the early 1960s and moved to
take over most of their functions as state responsibilities, thereby
depriving the associations of their momentum and autonomy. Abu Zayd
implemented these policies, which were aimed at benefiting female
workers and peasants. The Ministry of Social Affairs which she headed
was increasingly specializing in women's issues. In 1963, it organized a
general and wide-ranging women's conference to discuss, among other
things, ways to increase female economic productivity, working women's
leading role in spreading family planning, as well as the rise of family
income through the employment of female members. Abu Zayd was named to
preside over the conference, thereby cementing her status as leader of
the women's movement in Egypt. She became coordinator for women's
activities within the Arab Socialist Union in 1963, at a time when the
party had nearly 250,000 female members.

During her time in office, Abu Zayd worked on several different social
issues. She strongly supported a law that prohibited Islamic oral
repudiation and made it mandatory for a husband to go to court to be
able to divorce his wife. In order to combat mendicity, she imposed
prison terms on recidivist beggars who returned to begging after they
had received state-sponsored training in handicrafts. In addition to
registering NGOs and expanding their development activities, she
launched projects aimed at improving the status of rural women. One of
the most sensitive tasks assigned to Abu Zayd was the relocation of
thousands of Nubians, displaced by the construction of the Aswan Dam, to
newly built villages. Her management of the resettlement process led to
her being nicknamed the "Merciful Heart of the Revolution" by Nasser.
Nevertheless, the Nubians' forced displacement remains controversial in
Egypt to this day, with some blaming Nasser for the neglectful
conditions in which the relocated Nubians have been living since then.

On a personal level, Abu Zayd faced domestic problems during her tenure
as minister. Her husband was resentful of her responsibility-laden role
and of the amount of time she spent outside the house. Their previously
modest lifestyle changed considerably as she hired a 12-year-old
houseboy and was provided a chauffeur-driven car by the government.

Exile in Libya Following Nasser's death in 1970 and Anwar Sadat's
ascension to the presidency, Abu Zayd's career progression was blocked.
She moved to Libya with her husband in 1974. Her Nasserist convictions
were in line with the anti-colonialism, anti-Zionism and pan-Arabism of
Libya's leader Muammar Gaddafi. Abu Zayd spent nearly two decades in
Libya, during which time she taught political science at Al Fateh
University in Tripoli. She also penned articles and made speeches
denouncing the Egyptian government. Abu Zayd began criticizing President
Sadat in the mid-1970s. She became a leader of the Egyptian National
Front, which was set up in Damascus in 1980 by General Saad El Shazly.
The organization called for the overthrow of Sadat's government. Due to
her opposition to Sadat's peace overture to Israel, Abu Zayd was accused
of high treason, terrorism and spying, and was consequently deprived of
her Egyptian nationality. This turned her into a stateless political
refugee. A long legal battle ensued, which was finally resolved in late
1991 when a judge ruled that Abu Zayd and her husband were entitled to
their Egyptian passports. She was also acquitted of the charges of high
treason and terrorism.

Later years and death After having recovered their nationality, Abu Zayd
and her husband came back to Egypt in March 1992. She was treated as a
VIP upon her return, and rushed to visit Nasser's mausoleum. During the
1990s, she opposed the Gulf War, the Madrid Peace Conference, as well as
Zionism and American imperialism. She wrote articles for al-Osboa
newspaper in 1998 dealing with the issues of Western imperialism and
Arab unity. In late 2010, she was hospitalized at the Anglo-American
Hospital in Cairo to receive treatment for her bone fractures. Farkhonda
Hassan visited her there on behalf of then First Lady Suzanne Mubarak.
During her stay at the hospital, Abu Zayd granted an interview to
Almasry Alyoum newspaper in which she defended Nasser's legacy and
lamented the loss of tolerance in Egypt.

Abu Zayd died in Cairo on 30 July 2011.

Awards Abu Zayd received the Lenin Peace Prize in December 1970.
